---
Title: Topics in Econ
Date: 2024-11-21 07:00:00 +0200
Tags: econ
slug: topics_in_econ
---

Let's take a look at the IS-LM-PC model again. There will be some overlap with the [previous article](https://aceofgreens.github.io/a_tour_de_force_of_the_economy.html), but the emphasis here will be slightly different.

Aggregate output $Y$ depends on the firms producing goods. In a closed economy, total output equal total income. The production function depends on capital $K$ and labour $L$, which are called the *factors of production*, and their costs are the rental price $R$ and wages $W$. Total output is determined by production. 

**Production**. If firms are price-takers in both the inputs and output markets, as in perfect competition, then the price $P$, wages $W$ and rental costs $R$ are exogeneous. Firms maximize profit $\pi = PF(K, L) - RK - WL$ and a first-order condition for selecting the right quantity of $(K, L)$ is given by $\frac{\partial F}{\partial K} = R/P$ and $\frac{\partial F}{\partial L} = W/P$. Thus, it is optimal for firms to increase $K$ and $L$ until their marginal products become equal to the real costs of the factors of production - the real wage $W/P$ and the real cost of capital $R/P$.

**Economic profits**. Firm profits at that quantity equal $\pi = Y - F_K'K - F_L' L$, where $F_K'$ and $F_L'$ are the corresponding derivatives. If we assume that the production function $F$ has constant returns to scale, so that $zY = F(zK, zL)$, and take the derivative with respect to $z$ we get $Y = zF_K' K + zF_L' L$. Setting $z=1$ we get the exact expression for the profits $\pi$. Thus, under perfect competition and constant returns to scale we can say that total income gets fully spent and divided between the factors of production, according to their productivities. There is no economic profit. An additional worker is employed only if his incremental contribution to profit is greater than his real wage.

**Demand for goods and services**. The total demand for goods and services $Z$ comes from households, which consume (and save), firms, which invest (and produce), and governments which fund public projects (and tax), $Z = C + I + G$. In an open economy the net trade balance also affects demand, but we'll assume a closed economy for now. Households spend a fraction of their disposable income $Y - T$, with $T$ being the taxes, in the goods and services markets. Whatever is not spent, is saved. These savings are deposited in banks or used to buy bonds, stocks, or mutual funds. In other words, savings enter the financial markets. Firms on the other hand invest in capital goods to increase their productive capacity. These purchases are funded by bank loans, or by issuing bonds and shares. Thus, a *market for loanable funds* is formed where households are the suppliers and firms are the consumers. Capital accumulation is an intertemporal affair and the price in the market of loanable funds is the interest rate. Thus, demand for inverstment depends negatively on the real interest rate $r$, $I(r)$.

**Investment-Saving**. For markets to clear, we need the supply for goods and services $Y$ to equal the demand $Z$. Note that at equilibrium, when $Y = C + I + G$, one can rearrange the variables so that total spending, given by the sum of private spending $Y - T - C$ and public spending $T - G$ is equal to investment $I$, i.e $(Y - T -C) + (T - G) = I$. This is the same way to look at the equilibrium - households' desire to save balances out firms' desire to invest.

**Classical view equilibrium**. The classical macroeconomic view is that the combination of $(K, L)$ is the only thing that determines output $Y$. Hence, if the production factors $K$ and $L$ are fixed, then also total output $Y$ is fixed. Government spending $G$ is also usually assumed exogeneous and fixed. Hence, if there is a shock increase to, say, consumption, the only thing that can change is the real interest rate $r$ in the financial markets. This is a crucial point. Demand-side shocks usually do not impact the production factors and hence output is unchanged. The variable which adjusts is the real interest rate $r$. Hence the relationships:

1. An increase in consumption $C$ raises the interest rate as there are less loanable funds overall
2. An increase in government spending $G$ does not change consumption and output, but reduces equilibrium investment and increases the interest rate.
3. Assuming consumption does not depend on the interest rate, an increase in investment demand raises the interest rate but not the equilibrium investment level.

**Money**.
