---
layout: post
title: The Ultimate Road Trip
date: 2023-04-29 07:00:00 +0200
tags: []
# excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

I have been planning the details of this trip for 6 months. I have been considering it for at least a year. And finally my plan has come to fruition - an epic trip into the northermost Scottish wilderness. For an adventure seeker, this trip contained everything - hikes, castles, parks, cathedrals, museums, cliffs and hills, mountains, lakes, caves, wilderness, breath-taking scenery, and a healthy amount of unrelentless fog and rain. I can only say that I'm proud of this mesmerizing experience and consider it truly a lifelong achievement.

### Day 1 - Arriving in Edinburgh
We step off the plane in the Edinburgh airport and taste the damp humid air. The ground is wet. Almost constant drizzle wets all the outdoor surfaces. The earth is shaky with excitement for what is to come. The first pet we see - a Scottish terrier. We quickly catch a bus to St. Andrews' square in Edinburgh and leave our luggage in the quaint and traditional Old Waverley hotel - an optimal location where one can base their further exploration. The first step is to get a nice introduction of the city and its history in the Museum of Edinburgh - this included various historic facts, social aspects related to living conditions, healthcare, wellbeing, as well as tales like those of the [Greyfriar Bobby](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Greyfriars_Bobby). I hold a special interest toward animal stories like that of Bobby the Skye terrier, [Unsinkable Sam](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unsinkable_Sam), or even [William Windsor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_Windsor_(goat)) and [Nils Olav III](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nils_Olav).

Right after that, the next logical step is right across the street - the People's Story museum, which focuses more on the living conditions and how the various professions have evolved throught the city's history. One interesting aspect was learning about the poorhouses. The establishment of poorhouses in Edinburgh was a response to the growing issue of poverty and homelessness during the Industrial Revolution. The poorhouse residents, known as "inmates", were required to follow strict rules and perform manual labor in exchange for food, clothing, and shelter. The living conditions were often repulsive, and the quality of food and medical care was often inadequate. Inmates in poorhouses were often stigmatized as "undeserving poor" or "paupers" and were typically segregated by gender, age, and sometimes by their perceived moral character. Throughout the 20th century, poorhouses were gradually modified into the current poor relief welfare programs. A massive endeavour was to clear out (or tear down) various slums as well.

After the museum, we headed over to [Calton Hill](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Calton_Hill) which is close by. This iconic landmark is one of Edinburgh's key signatures and offers outstanding cityscape which one can marvel at for hours. After that, we visited the [Scotch Whisky Experience](https://www.scotchwhiskyexperience.co.uk/) and [Surgeon's Hall](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Surgeons%27_Hall). Regarding the former, it was a most-curious tour about how Scotch whisky is made and how the different types like Highland, Speyside, and Islay differ. Regarding the latter, it was probably the most disgusting museum I've been to (e.g. William Burke's pocketbook). Nonetheless, it was very nice to get a sense of how difficult and tricky it can be to operate a da Vinci surgical robot. Also, the various dentistry and pathology collections were quite curious in showing how our modern medicine has evolved.

After 5 pm when the "timed" exhibitions end, one can go explore the city (University of Edinburgh, St. Gile's Cathedral, etc.), or stop for a pint and a nice dinner. On Friday and Saturday the city is alive - an autonomous entity with buzzing agents that create a unique immersive experience - bagpipers playing Amazing Grace, drunkards laughing loudly in the streets, football hooligans screaming in joy. What a sight.

### Day 2 - A Full Day at Glasgow
The second day was all about Glasgow - the biggest city in Scotland. Whereas Edinburgh is a boutique and compact city, Glasgow is urban and huge. We caught the train pretty early in the morning and by 9:30 am were in the main station. It was cold and windy. We first went to the [Kelvingrove](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kelvingrove_Art_Gallery_and_Museum) museum - an imposing edifice housing all kinds of artifacts - from natural history to art. A sizeable organ played at 1 pm to the amusement of all visitors. While I didn't care much about the art sections, the natural history collections were more than adequate. From the museum, it's a short hilly walk to the [University of Glasgow](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/University_of_Glasgow) and its small but nice Hunterian museum. It included various interesting scenes - comparisons of wasp/bee nests and termite hills, corals and lichen structures, fossils and remains, various gems and minerals, as well as a sizeable collection of Lord Kelvin's inventions and Joseph Lister's (pioneer of antiseptic surgery) specimens. It's also Scotland's oldest public museum. The architecture of the university is truly stunning and walking in the gardens between the different sections feels like being in the 16th century.

After these museums, we walked to the nearest tube and went to the [Glasgow cathedral](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glasgow_Cathedral) and the [Necropolis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glasgow_Necropolis) next to it. The Necropolis itself is striking - it's more or less a park but with ravens and crows cawing around you in the fog. The Cathedral demands equal attention - its Gothic architecture and stained glass windows, make it more memorable than most other churches. After these sights it was already late afternoon, so we headed off to find food and to warm our tired bones for about 30-40 minutes. Sweet sweet rest.

After 5 pm, when museums closed, we decided to simply walk around and soak our eyes in the city. We saw the Glasgow Green park, McLennan arch, Nelson's monument and from there walked along the Clyde river to the busier parts of the city. Curiously, while walking along the river in a neighborhood not particularly suited for tourists, we saw some coppers handling out fines to a group of graffitti artists. After that, we explored Buchanan street along with various points of interest like George Square, Royal Exchange Square, and the Lighthouse. We caught the late train to Edinburgh and had a laugh discussing our travellings that day.

### Day 3 - From Edinburgh to Inverness
The previous two days were only warm-up. On the third day the real adventure starts. Our goal for that day was to get from Edinburgh to Inverness while also going on three separate hikes. To that end, we woke up early, caught the bus to the Edinburgh airport and went to rent a car. Soon, we were on our way, crossing the iconic [Queensferry bridge](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Queensferry_Crossing) - the longest triple tower cable-stayed bridge in the world.

After stopping to stockpile some provisions, the first stop was the [Lochleven Castle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lochleven_Castle). We specifically had brought binoculars to the trip which came in quite handy throughout our travels. Along the castle, there was a heavy abundance of wildlife - geese, swans, birds, and pheasants were all a common sight. Travelling north, the second stop, albeit a quick one, was the [Scone Palace](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scone_Palace) near Perth. This is a beautiful palace famous for being the crowning place of Scottish kings and for housing the Stone of Destiny.

Further to the north came our first hike for the day - the Hermitage near Dunkeld - a Perthshire classic. Old tall trees covered in moss and lichen in a dense forest create a mesmerizing walk while the water dripping from every leaf creates a fresh and cool feel. The rocks were green and fully covered in moss. The small river near the walk creates a ramling brown noise that further soothes the senses.

The second hike was The Falls of Bruar near Blair Atholl. This was an entirely different setting. It's a beautiful steep climb on the side of the Bruar river with multiple scenic viewpoints of the waterfalls. However, the water had a distinctive bronze colour. Much of Scotland's land, particularly in the Highlands, is covered in peat - a type of soil that forms in wetland conditions from the partial decay of plant material. It's rich in organic matter, which can leach into rivers and streams, coloring the water a dark brown or bronze hue. This, along with other minerals, humic substances, or iron, causes the distinctive brownish colour of the water.

The third hike was at the Uath Lochans - three small lochs near Aviemore, in the northwest of the [Cairngorms](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cairngorms). Reaching this place was a marvel due to how rapidly the landscape changes. Before the Cairngorms the scenery consists of green plains and numerous sheep. Once you start approaching the mountain range, you start seeing more and more hills, with fewer and fewer forests, only yellow, red, and black shrubs and bushes. It's like you're venturing into a nuclear zone where some of the vegetation has just started reappearing. It's glorious honestly. As was the hike. It was a classical forest biome, with some epic viewpoints sprinkled for good measure. Lots of wildlife as well - pheasants, hares, and grey herons. Around 7.30 pm we continued towards Inverness.

### Day 4 - From Inverness to Wick
One of our main goals was to do the [North Coast 500](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/North_Coast_500) (NC500) route. And actually, today was the first part of that adventure. We headed off to the [Black Isle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Black_Isle), Chanonry Point in particular. It's located at the end of a small spit of land extending into the Moray Firth. There is also a working lighthouse build in the middle of the 19th century. Although the weather was quite harsh - windy and raining, I particularly enjoyed this place. There was a strong particularly strong smell of dimethyl sulfide - often attributed to the smell of the sea. Moreover, walking along the lighthouse along the waves of the water was a particularly meditative experience. I suppose what I enjoyed most was the overall maritime ambiance.

After that we hiked to the Fairy Glen Falls, again in the Black Isle. While not bad, this was definitely the least impactful experience of the trip. The two waterfalls were nice, but the path to them was quite muddy, due to the adverse weather conditions. After that, we continued north to the Glenmorangie distillery and [Dunrobin castle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dunrobin_Castle), a picturesque stately home where once aristocratic families from the Clan Sutherland lived. The castle has a impressive garden and a whopping 189 rooms!
Further up the road is the [Cairn Liath](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carn_Liath_(broch)) broch which was a nice quick educational sight shedding light on how primitive people lived in the Bronze Age.

On the way to Wick the landscape becomes rather epic. The cities become fewer, only invidual farms and houses constitute most of the buildings. The road trails the coast and the sea is a constant sight. On the right, sharp cliffs become more and more noticeable. We skipped the Whaligoe steps on the way to Wick because of bad weather and not enough time. In Wick we stayed in the Bank Guest House hotel which is one of the most authentic hotels I've been in. It had a old rustic smell, an Axminster carpet, and nice comfortable apartments. In the following morning, while I was eating my Highland breakfast, the radio was on and some gentlemen on BBC Four were debating whether an increase in taxes would lead to people becoming unmotivated to work hard.

### Day 5 - From Wick to Tongue
This was a busy day. Awoken by the sun and the squawking of seagulls, we had breakfast and quickly rushed off back to the Whaligoe steps. What a breathtaking view - 365 steps descending the steepest cliffs where only gulls and puffins roam. Hundres of years ago, this rugged piece of coastline was bustling with trade during the herring days. Fishermen would bring the boat into the small inlet, haul it using a winch-like device, and offload the cargo. The herring would then be carried manually all the way to the markets in Wick.

After Whaligoe, we went to the Old Pulteney distillery and the Wick Heritage Museum. The small museum was in fact, one of the best museums I've ever visited - small and compact, but meticulously filled to the brim with content. It explores Wick's maritime history as once the "herring capital of Europe". Beautiful artifacts from the workshops, harbours, and ships give a detailed account of how the fishing industry worked and what life was back then.

North of Wick, one can find the ruins of [Castle Sinclair Girnigoe](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Castle_Sinclair_Girnigoe). This was another awesome castle where one has the opportunity of going inside the ruins or around the bottom, close to the sea. Further north is [John o' Groats](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_o%27_Groats) - a small village which overlooks the Orkney archipelago. Here travellers can marvel at the calmness of the sea, walk the docks, or enjoy various craft beers. Closeby is the popular [Duncasby Head lighthouse](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Duncansby_Head) where one can walk miles along the cliffs to their heart's content. We spent a significant amount of time here walking to the Duncasby sea stacks and observing the various birds nesting.

At this point we turned west. Passing the Castle of Mey one reaches the beautiful Dunnet beach and Dunnet Head - the most northerly point of mainland Britain. When we were there the weather was not particularly favourable and it felt as cold as absolute zero. Nonetheless, the place is *epic*. It was like you're standing on the edge of the world and the wind will push you over. Continuing further to the west, one finally reaches Tongue.

### Day 6 - From Tongue to Ullapool

### Day 7 - From Ullapool to Skye

### Day 8 - A Full Day at Skye

### Day 9 - From Skye to Edinburgh

### Day 10 - A Full Day at Edinburgh

### Day 11 - The End
